README.md, before:

# Full-Stack HR Application - by Jason Benjoya

## [Live demo!](https://cc-hr-application-1.onrender.com/)

---

### PROJECT GOALS

The task was to create a simple full-stack web application for basic HR functions, specifically around payroll. This application is a simple and fully-featured MVP, with the ability to view, create, update, and delete employees. Employee metadata includes their name, salary, and various pay deductions, as well as the calculated net pay. The technologies used:

- HTML5
- CSS3
- Typescript
- Bootstrap
- Axios
- PostgreSQL
- NodeJS
- ExpressJS
- ReactJS

---

### ABOUT THE APP

This app is, in the simplest terms, a very basic payroll viewing and editing system. Given the open-ended nature of the project prompt, I made choices about the desired feature-set that allow for future expansion and improvement.

---

### System Design Choices

#### Database:

I decided to use a lightweight PostgreSQL database for this project to store employee and deduction data. I wanted the ability to categorize deductions explicitly by type (tax, benefits, etc), which made for a great use-case for its own table. Each deduction has a foreign key to the given employee, as well as the amount and type. For any given employee, they can only have at most one deduction of each type.

Considerations: Due to the simple nature of this app, having a NoSQL database could also work just as well, and would still have the ability to track deductions for employee by type. However, the structured nature of the SQL database made for a much simpler way to do database-level calculations for the total deductions and net pay, which made for a more efficient server. The tradeoff, of course, comes with the desire to add more possible types for the Deductions, which will require a database migration.

#### Server

I used a simple nodeJS/ExpressJS server for my backend. I utilized the KnexJS ORM to interface with my database, which includes all necessary operations to create the tables and functions there-in. The backend uses TypeScript for more explicit type safety. I split the logic between repositories, controllers, and routes, so that each layer would be responsible for an explicit task. The repositories do all of the database operations, controllers call those methods and return the express responses back to the routes, which utilize any middleware that may be needed.

In the case of this app, the only middleware I added was a zod validation middleware for mutating operations, and a global error handler for cleaner and more explicit error handling.

#### Front End

The front end is a single-page application using ReactJS with typescript, and was scaffolded for ease of creation using the `create vite` tool. The front-end uses an api interface service with axios to centralize all api logic in one locaiton. Each operation is then called in a custom react hook that is meant to run only that operation (separation of concerns, encapsulation). I used a simple React router that could navigate to my three major routes for viewing all employees, viewing/editing a single employee, or creating an employee. There is also a catch-all not-found page for any mal-formed URLs. The whole app is styled using bootstrap utility classes. The front-end has clearly delineated pathways for all CRUD operations required for this app.

### FRONT END/USER FLOW

NOTE: This app was created with the mobile-first mindset, so users can/should feel empowered to utilize either desktop or mobile (or anything in between) to access the application.

#### <ins>Landing Page</ins>

The main landing page is simply the employee list page. Any already-created employees will show on this page either in a table, or a card format (Depending on the form factor of the user's device). If no employees exist a simple message alerts the user to this situation. There is also a button on this page to create a new employee, which will navigate the user to the employee creation page.

The fields shown in the cards and table rows for each user include their name, their salary, the sum of all deductions they pay, and finally the calculation of their net pay. The table view is fully sortable.

Users can also find an employee search bar at the top that allows them to filter the list by name. On desktop, the search is in real time (with a short debounce to comply with UX standards), and on mobile, due to the presence of virtual keyboards, the filtering logic waits for a submit button press. The search is case insensitive and will find any records with partial matches.

Desktop
![Landing Page](static/employees_list.png)

Mobile
![Landing Page Mobile](static/employees_list_mobile.png)

Clicking the "Add Employee" button will navigate to the `/employees/create` route, which displays a fully empty form for creating a new employee. The available fields are for name, salary, and deductions. The deductions fields are unique. A dropdown is present for selecting what type of deduction a user wants to create for the employee. Clicking "add deduction" will create a new deduction input group, which will show the type as well as the amount. Only un-used deduction types for that specific employee will show in the dropdown, and if all are in use, the dropdown is hidden.

Mobile Creation with Dropdown
![Mobile Creation with Dropdown](static/mobile_creation_dropdown.png)

Mobile Creation With Deductions
![Mobile Creation with Deduction](static/mobile_creation_with_deduction.png)

The entire form has validation for each field as well as custom error messaging for any API errors.

Desktop Creation with Validation
![Desktop Creation with Validaiton](static/desktop_creation_with_validation.png)

#### <ins>View/Edit Employee Details</ins>

Once a user is created, or if a table row/card is clicked from the main list page, the user is navigated to the employee details page, located at `/employees/:id`.

On this page, the user can see much more granular detail about the employee's data. Along with the total sum of deductions and the net pay, each deduction present for a given employee is shown with its amount, so the user can see how the total is broken down.

From this view, a user can click the edit button, which will bring up the same form as the create page, only with initial values prepopulating the fields. They can also return back to the main page by clicking the `Back` button at the top as long as they are not actively editing the form.

View Employee Details
![View employee details](static/view_employee_details.png)

Edit Employee Details
![edit employee details](static/edit_employee_details.gif)

#### Adding and Deleting Deductions

For a given deduction on the create and edit pages, a `delete` button exists. The behavior of this button depends upon whether the deduction is newly added, or if it already existed for the employee. When adding a deduction, it is not saved to the database and linked with an employee until the `Update Employee`
or `Create Employee` button is pressed, thus running the method to hit the respective API endpoint. Before that point, each deduction is a simple UX component, and pressing the delete key will simply clear it from the UI.

If, however, the deduction was pre-populated in the form while editing an employee, pressing the delete button will trigger a modal alerting the user that the deduction will be deleted from the database, and that such an operation cannot be undone. Even upon cancelling from editing the form itself, a deleted deduction will remain deleted.

![deduction deletion](static/deleting_deductions.gif)

#### Cancelling an Edit or Creation

The form for creaeting and editing an employee keeps track of dirty (edited) fields. If a user attempts to cancel a form that has been edited, they will be alerted with a modal asking if they are sure. If a user attempts to cancel editing a form they have not changed, they will simply be navigated away.

The navigation destination is dependent on the operation (create vs edit). If the user was attempting to create a new employee, they will be navigated back to the main `/` route with the full employee list. If editing, the `isEditing` state is reverted to `false`, returning to the `View Details` component state.

Note that in either case, successfully saving the form will navigate the user to the `/employees/:id` route to see the full employee details.

#### Deleting an Employee

If a user wishes to delete an employee, they can do so from the main list page. Whether on mobile or desktop, each employee record displays a delete button. Upon pressing, a user is alerted that this is a permanent action and is given the chance to cancel. If they do proceed, the employee record is immediately removed from the UI and can no longer be accessed.

Mobile
![deleting an employee mobile](static/mobile_employee_delete.gif)

Desktop
![deleting an employee desktop](static/desktop_employee_delete.gif)

#### Running Backend Tests

All unit tests were created using the Jest testing library, with the integration tests utilizing the Supertest library, as well. The testing suite currently contains 39 tests in total, which provides roughly 92% coverage over all back-end operations.

---

### Running the App

To run the app locally on your machine, clone this repository or download the code directly to your machine. From each folder, backend and frontend, run `npm install` to install all necessary packages and dependencies.

MAKE SURE YOU HAVE POSTGRESQL INSTALLED ON YOUR MACHINE BEFORE YOU CONTINUE.

From the backend folder, first set up the database by running `npm run db:setup`. Next, run `npm run dev` to start up the development server on `localhost:3001`. From the colab-frontend folder, run 'npm start' to start up the development server on the front end.

**Note** It is highly recommended to copy over the values in `.env.example` to your own `.env`. You can change the values as desired. The app will still run using default fallback values for each env variable.

## Future Considerations

### Authentication and Authorization

Right now, the app has no safeguards around employee data manipulation. Any user with the app URL can easily edit employee data. This is obviously not desired. The next version of this app should and would have a dedicated authentication system built into the API, comprised of a new `users` table to store admin users to the system. A V3 of the app could even include non-admin users who can only view their own details, but not make any edits or view any other employees' details.

The frontend would have a log-in feature for users to sign in. All pages of the front end would be protected behind the sign-in route. Signed-in users would be tracked via global app state (context) or cookies (session tokens).

Note: In V2, where only admins have accounts, there would be no `Registration` logic, as an existing admin should have to manually allow another non-existing admin user access to the portal. V3 would add in the ability for non-admin users to register to view their own data. Employee records would have a foreign-key relationship to users in that scenario.

### Features

#### Time-based calculations

Deductions and salary payments tend to be processed at regular intervals, be it monthly, bi-weekly, or otherwise. This can differ from employee-to-employee. A future feature expansion would allow a new field on each employee to mark how often they are paid. That value can be changed when editing a user, and all calculations around salary, net pay, and total deductions would likewise be displayed to corroborate that time interval. Time-based calculations may also only be desired on certain fields (deductions, not salary for example). This would allow for flexibility in how an employee can view/understand their full pay, along with the incremental nature of it.

#### Even more granularity in Deductions

There are far more deduction use-cases. Future versions of the app would include all of those, and may even remove the "other" category as it is not very informative.

#### Sorting Employees List On Mobilie

The desktop view of the employees list is fully sortable by nature of the `react-table` component. A potential quick-win improvement would be to add manual sorting to the page such that sorting is possible and mobile, and such that it persists when changing views. Depending on the device, it may be possible that simple rotating the screen changes from mobile to desktop view, and thus persisting the sorting/filtering between views would be a much cleaner UX.

### Scalability

The simple nature of this app lends itself well to scale up as the company grows. The employee data and deductions data is all relatively simple, and therefore can scale without issue. As more features are added and more users are accessising it, there may be a desire to spin up multiple dyno instances of the server and buffer traffic with a load balancer, just to maintain efficient data flow.

One biproduct of scaling to consider,though, is page-load times for the main page as more and more employees have to be fetched. A caching layer on the front end could be useful to prevent unnecessary API fetching of employees already in the cache.

Commit message:

update readme and add to env.test.example

README.md, after:

# Full-Stack HR Application - by Jason Benjoya

## [Live demo!](https://cc-hr-application-1.onrender.com/)

---

### PROJECT GOALS

The task was to create a simple full-stack web application for basic HR functions, specifically around payroll. This application is a simple and fully-featured MVP, with the ability to view, create, update, and delete employees. Employee metadata includes their name, salary, and various pay deductions, as well as the calculated net pay. The technologies used:

- HTML5
- CSS3
- Typescript
- Bootstrap
- Axios
- PostgreSQL
- NodeJS
- ExpressJS
- ReactJS

---

### ABOUT THE APP

This app is, in the simplest terms, a very basic payroll viewing and editing system. Given the open-ended nature of the project prompt, I made choices about the desired feature-set that allow for future expansion and improvement.

---

### System Design Choices

#### Database:

I decided to use a lightweight PostgreSQL database for this project to store employee and deduction data. I wanted the ability to categorize deductions explicitly by type (tax, benefits, etc), which made for a great use-case for its own table. Each deduction has a foreign key to the given employee, as well as the amount and type. For any given employee, they can only have at most one deduction of each type.

Considerations: Due to the simple nature of this app, having a NoSQL database could also work just as well, and would still have the ability to track deductions for employee by type. However, the structured nature of the SQL database made for a much simpler way to do database-level calculations for the total deductions and net pay, which made for a more efficient server. The tradeoff, of course, comes with the desire to add more possible types for the Deductions, which will require a database migration.

#### Server

I used a simple nodeJS/ExpressJS server for my backend. I utilized the KnexJS ORM to interface with my database, which includes all necessary operations to create the tables and functions there-in. The backend uses TypeScript for more explicit type safety. I split the logic between repositories, controllers, and routes, so that each layer would be responsible for an explicit task. The repositories do all of the database operations, controllers call those methods and return the express responses back to the routes, which utilize any middleware that may be needed.

In the case of this app, the only middleware I added was a zod validation middleware for mutating operations, and a global error handler for cleaner and more explicit error handling.

#### Front End

The front end is a single-page application using ReactJS with typescript, and was scaffolded for ease of creation using the `create vite` tool. The front-end uses an api interface service with axios to centralize all api logic in one locaiton. Each operation is then called in a custom react hook that is meant to run only that operation (separation of concerns, encapsulation). I used a simple React router that could navigate to my three major routes for viewing all employees, viewing/editing a single employee, or creating an employee. There is also a catch-all not-found page for any mal-formed URLs. The whole app is styled using bootstrap utility classes. The front-end has clearly delineated pathways for all CRUD operations required for this app.

### FRONT END/USER FLOW

NOTE: This app was created with the mobile-first mindset, so users can/should feel empowered to utilize either desktop or mobile (or anything in between) to access the application.

#### <ins>Landing Page</ins>

The main landing page is simply the employee list page. Any already-created employees will show on this page either in a table, or a card format (Depending on the form factor of the user's device). If no employees exist a simple message alerts the user to this situation. There is also a button on this page to create a new employee, which will navigate the user to the employee creation page.

The fields shown in the cards and table rows for each user include their name, their salary, the sum of all deductions they pay, and finally the calculation of their net pay. The table view is fully sortable.

Users can also find an employee search bar at the top that allows them to filter the list by name. On desktop, the search is in real time (with a short debounce to comply with UX standards), and on mobile, due to the presence of virtual keyboards, the filtering logic waits for a submit button press. The search is case insensitive and will find any records with partial matches.

Desktop
![Landing Page](static/employees_list.png)

Mobile
![Landing Page Mobile](static/employees_list_mobile.png)

Clicking the "Add Employee" button will navigate to the `/employees/create` route, which displays a fully empty form for creating a new employee. The available fields are for name, salary, and deductions. The deductions fields are unique. A dropdown is present for selecting what type of deduction a user wants to create for the employee. Clicking "add deduction" will create a new deduction input group, which will show the type as well as the amount. Only un-used deduction types for that specific employee will show in the dropdown, and if all are in use, the dropdown is hidden.

Mobile Creation with Dropdown
![Mobile Creation with Dropdown](static/mobile_creation_dropdown.png)

Mobile Creation With Deductions
![Mobile Creation with Deduction](static/mobile_creation_with_deduction.png)

The entire form has validation for each field as well as custom error messaging for any API errors.

Desktop Creation with Validation
![Desktop Creation with Validaiton](static/desktop_creation_with_validation.png)

#### <ins>View/Edit Employee Details</ins>

Once a user is created, or if a table row/card is clicked from the main list page, the user is navigated to the employee details page, located at `/employees/:id`.

On this page, the user can see much more granular detail about the employee's data. Along with the total sum of deductions and the net pay, each deduction present for a given employee is shown with its amount, so the user can see how the total is broken down.

From this view, a user can click the edit button, which will bring up the same form as the create page, only with initial values prepopulating the fields. They can also return back to the main page by clicking the `Back` button at the top as long as they are not actively editing the form.

View Employee Details
![View employee details](static/view_employee_details.png)

Edit Employee Details
![edit employee details](static/edit_employee_details.gif)

#### Adding and Deleting Deductions

For a given deduction on the create and edit pages, a `delete` button exists. The behavior of this button depends upon whether the deduction is newly added, or if it already existed for the employee. When adding a deduction, it is not saved to the database and linked with an employee until the `Update Employee`
or `Create Employee` button is pressed, thus running the method to hit the respective API endpoint. Before that point, each deduction is a simple UX component, and pressing the delete key will simply clear it from the UI.

If, however, the deduction was pre-populated in the form while editing an employee, pressing the delete button will trigger a modal alerting the user that the deduction will be deleted from the database, and that such an operation cannot be undone. Even upon cancelling from editing the form itself, a deleted deduction will remain deleted.

![deduction deletion](static/deleting_deductions.gif)

#### Cancelling an Edit or Creation

The form for creaeting and editing an employee keeps track of dirty (edited) fields. If a user attempts to cancel a form that has been edited, they will be alerted with a modal asking if they are sure. If a user attempts to cancel editing a form they have not changed, they will simply be navigated away.

The navigation destination is dependent on the operation (create vs edit). If the user was attempting to create a new employee, they will be navigated back to the main `/` route with the full employee list. If editing, the `isEditing` state is reverted to `false`, returning to the `View Details` component state.

Note that in either case, successfully saving the form will navigate the user to the `/employees/:id` route to see the full employee details.

#### Deleting an Employee

If a user wishes to delete an employee, they can do so from the main list page. Whether on mobile or desktop, each employee record displays a delete button. Upon pressing, a user is alerted that this is a permanent action and is given the chance to cancel. If they do proceed, the employee record is immediately removed from the UI and can no longer be accessed.

Mobile
![deleting an employee mobile](static/mobile_employee_delete.gif)

Desktop
![deleting an employee desktop](static/desktop_employee_delete.gif)

#### Running Backend Tests

All unit tests were created using the Jest testing library, with the integration tests utilizing the Supertest library, as well. The testing suite currently contains 39 tests in total, which provides roughly 92% coverage over all back-end operations.

---

### Running the App

To run the app locally on your machine, clone this repository or download the code directly to your machine. From each folder, backend and frontend, run `npm install` to install all necessary packages and dependencies.

MAKE SURE YOU HAVE POSTGRESQL INSTALLED ON YOUR MACHINE BEFORE YOU CONTINUE.

From the backend folder, first set up the database by running `npm run db:setup`. Next, run `npm run dev` to start up the development server on `localhost:3001`. From the colab-frontend folder, run 'npm start' to start up the development server on the front end.

**Note** It is highly recommended to copy over the values in `.env.example` and `.env.test.example` to your own `.env` and `.env.test` files, respectively. You can change the values as desired. The app will still run using default fallback values for each env variable, but you will need to set up the test db properly for tests to run locally.

## Future Considerations

### Authentication and Authorization

Right now, the app has no safeguards around employee data manipulation. Any user with the app URL can easily edit employee data. This is obviously not desired. The next version of this app should and would have a dedicated authentication system built into the API, comprised of a new `users` table to store admin users to the system. A V3 of the app could even include non-admin users who can only view their own details, but not make any edits or view any other employees' details.

The frontend would have a log-in feature for users to sign in. All pages of the front end would be protected behind the sign-in route. Signed-in users would be tracked via global app state (context) or cookies (session tokens).

Note: In V2, where only admins have accounts, there would be no `Registration` logic, as an existing admin should have to manually allow another non-existing admin user access to the portal. V3 would add in the ability for non-admin users to register to view their own data. Employee records would have a foreign-key relationship to users in that scenario.

### Features

#### Time-based calculations

Deductions and salary payments tend to be processed at regular intervals, be it monthly, bi-weekly, or otherwise. This can differ from employee-to-employee. A future feature expansion would allow a new field on each employee to mark how often they are paid. That value can be changed when editing a user, and all calculations around salary, net pay, and total deductions would likewise be displayed to corroborate that time interval. Time-based calculations may also only be desired on certain fields (deductions, not salary for example). This would allow for flexibility in how an employee can view/understand their full pay, along with the incremental nature of it.

#### Even more granularity in Deductions

There are far more deduction use-cases. Future versions of the app would include all of those, and may even remove the "other" category as it is not very informative.

#### Sorting Employees List On Mobilie

The desktop view of the employees list is fully sortable by nature of the `react-table` component. A potential quick-win improvement would be to add manual sorting to the page such that sorting is possible on mobile, and such that it persists when changing views. Depending on the device, it may be possible that simply rotating the screen changes from mobile to desktop view. Persisting the sorting between views would make for a much cleaner UX.

### Scalability

The simple nature of this app lends itself well to scale up as the company grows. The employee data and deductions data is all relatively simple, and therefore can scale without issue. As more features are added and more users are accessising it, there may be a desire to spin up multiple dyno instances of the server and buffer traffic with a load balancer, just to maintain efficient data flow.

One biproduct of scaling to consider,though, is page-load times for the main page as more and more employees have to be fetched. A caching layer on the front end could be useful to prevent unnecessary API fetching of employees already in the cache, and a cleaner/more-selective refetching tool for determining when to update the data in the cache.
